---
title: "Installable Web Apps In 2024"
description: "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet"
pubDate: "May 1 2024 23:20"
---

Over the past year, I've led the [KnightLife](https://knightlife.fyi) project
from inception to completion. It's an installable web app that gives users
access to the most extensive database of events at the University of Central
Florida. KnightLife taught me a lot, especially about web scraping Instagram
and database schema design.

However, today I want to talk about the state of installable web apps; also
known as [progressive web apps](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps)
or PWAs. KnightLife is a fully fledged installable web appâ€”complete with push
notifications and graceful degradation when users are offline.

## The Good

Why choose an installable web app? There are some really compelling advantages
that, for us, mostly panned out.

### One Codebase

There was one primary reason we chose to make an installable web app: we wanted
to avoid writing a separate web app, iOS app, and Android app. I'm happy to say
that, in practice, this is a huge win for rapid development.

It's hard to overstate how convenient it is to have a single codebase for all
of your UIs and business logic. There was no need to rewrite data types across
languages or reimplement UI widgets on different platforms. With a few
responsive CSS properties, you can easily build a UI that looks good everywhere
with just HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

I have experience with React Native, and the cross-platform UI development
experience is better for installable web apps. React Native doesn't implement
CSS exactly how it works in browsers,[^react-native-css] which is not a problem
in an installable web app (your app _is_ a browser).

We were able to build a nicer experience across all three platforms that we
would've been able to build in the same amount of time by making three separate
apps or by building a web app and a React Native or Flutter app.

### No App Store

I have limited experience publishing an app in the App Store or Google Play
Store, but I know some people who seem cursed by Apple and Google with the
issues they have publishing apps. Others seem to have had a smooth experience.
Regardless, nothing beats the ease of pushing updates on the open web.

We never had to worry that Google or Apple might decide to take down our app or
otherwise stall updates in any way. We're able to push updates to the app
within minutes and without any approvals from a company.

There are no restrictions on the content we can put in the app. If we were to
want to take payment details, we could store and process those however we
choose. There's no 30% cut to pay to the platform owner. These things don't
particuarly matter for our app, but could be game changers for some kinds of
apps.

One big advantage of installable web apps is that you can pretty easily set up
preview deployments of branches or testing branches of the app up on a separate
domain or subdomain of the main application. It's a lot easier to visit
a testing URL than to install a testing version of an app. This really helped
our efforts to review each others' features.

## The Bad

We had a good experience building KnightLife as an installable web app, but
it's not all sunshine and roses. You have to recognize that you're swimming
against the current in many ways compared to building traditional native apps.
There are a lot of minor gaps in the experience that make it impossible to
recommend without some reservations.

### Animations

There's no question that web apps lack the silky smooth animations that are
possible with native apps. If you're going for a platform-native feel, you're
also never going to be able to get fully there with a web app.

But frankly, many apps don't _need_ that. My bank's app already has basically
no animations anyway. There's nothing I need them to do that they couldn't do
with an installable web app. Many of the apps I use don't need visual
improvements; they need core functionality and stability problems fixed.

But if you care about giving users the absolute best possible visual
experience, I still think native apps are king.

### Offline Support

It's possible but tricky to implement offline support for installable web apps.
You have to implement the caching yourself by writing a using a powerful but
easy-to-misuse API that can intercept and modify all requests.

We ran into an issue with SvelteKit where navigating to a new page while
offline would implicitly block on a network request to refresh some data. This
network request was not well documented, so it was somewhat difficult to work
out exactly why things failed. The service worker APIs allow you to handle
these cases, but documentation on how to do this properly doesn't really exist.

With other frameworks you may have an easier time, but in any cases it's
important to understand exactly how and when your data is being fetched in
order to avoid flaky internet from breaking your app's navigation when offline.

I used a custom network profile called Lie-Fi[^lie-fi] to help test the app in
the presence of hostile network conditions (extremely high latency and low data
transfer). Your worst enemy is not being offline, but being "online" but with
no data actually transferring. I highly recommend creating your own Lie-Fi
profile with high latency to see if things break when networks requests just
hang forever instead of failing or succeeding.

If you don't actually need your app to work offline, just assume you'll be
online and avoid thinking about this entirely. It's not worth the pain in a lot
of cases.

### Persistent Storage

The web platform lacks a persistent storage solution that checks all of the
boxes. `localStorage` is perfect for little key-value blobs with limited
writes, but it is has a heavily capped capacity. `IndexedDB` has high capacity,
but the API is unusable without [Dexie](https://dexie.org/) and it doesn't support SQL or
have great performance. There's an official WebAssembly build of SQLite that is
extremely impressive work, but it is still immature and suffers from many
limitations.[^headers]

I think that the WebAssembly build of SQLite and the browser APIs it builds on
is probably the long-term path forward if installable web apps become more
popular. SQLite is a great storage solution that is widely used in native apps,
so it's fitting to bring it to the browser too. However, it will be at least
a couple years until this project will mature to the point I would feel
comfortable recommending it.

We decided to use IndexedDB for data storage and an in-memory database called
[Orama](https://askorama.ai/) for full text search.

### No App Store

App stores are the de facto way to distribute apps to users. It's difficult to
get users to go through the tricky menu prompt to save a web app to their home
screen compared to sending them a link to your app store listing.[^trying-it]
If your requirement is solely that the app can have an icon on the home screen
though, it is entirely possible on both iOS and Android.

What isn't supported is directly prompting the user to install the app. Chrome
on Android automatically prompts the user directly to install, while Safari on
iOS disguises the option as bookmarking.

Regardless, users don't understand what it means to install a web app. If you
need users to install the app for important functionality, you'll likely want
to create your own set of instructions on a page in your site.

## The Ugly

There are some unfortunate realities of building installable web apps that
probably won't change. These may be dealbreakers for some projects.

### Uncertain Future

It's not clear that the future of installable web apps will be bigger and
better. They originally came about through efforts from the Google Chrome team
to build a web platform that competed with regular mobile apps, but there isn't
really an entity that is actively pushing for their adoption or development.

It's not hard to imagine a future where Google goes all-in on native apps and
lets the PWA APIs slowly dwindle into obscurity. Installable web apps are
clearly competition to the app stores of Apple and Google, so it's not exactly
a strategic priority for these companies to keep them working or make them
better.

Firefox desktop [dropped
support](https://9to5google.com/2021/01/27/firefox-discontinues-work-pwa-desktop/)
for the installability feature, seemingly because people just weren't using it.

[Apple broke installable web apps in the
EU](https://www.theverge.com/2024/2/14/24072764/apple-progressive-web-apps-eu-ios-17-4).
While this decision was ultimately reversed after public and EU backlash, drama
around the core technologies in your app is not the kind of thing you want to see.

With native apps, these sort of stunts would be unthinkable. The incentives
line up for Apple and Google to continue to make developing native apps better
every year.

For now, installable web apps continue to live on, but I'm less confident about
where they will be in 5 or 10 years. It's a good bet that the basic APIs will
continue to work, since many regular web apps also depend on them, but the
installability APIs and native platform integrations like push notifications
are on much shakier ground.

### Ecosystem isn't there

[MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps)
and [web.dev](https://web.dev/explore/progressive-web-apps) have some really
good pages, but you're often relying on a blog post from 2018 or your intuition
when building beyond the toy examples they provide.

Compared to building an actual native app, you're much more on your own for
debugging strange browser behavior around service workers or working out how an
obscure API is meant to be used.

Google has a library called [Workbox](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/workbox)
for building installable web apps, but my impression is that it is pretty
opinionated dependency that might not really be necessary for most apps. We
started by trying to use it, but ran into issues we couldn't solve because we
didn't have a good mental model of what it was actually doing under the hood.

In terms of frameworks, most of the popular JavaScript frameworks don't
directly support installable web apps. Getting a build/development
configuration that works for testing service worker changes is nontrivial.

We ran into some frustrating issues getting [vite-plugin-pwa](https://github.com/vite-pwa/vite-plugin-pwa)
working well in our project and ended up just building service worker support
ourselves.

### Lack of Polish

It's clear that installable web apps aren't widely used. There many minor
limitations and immersion breaks. [You can't easily change the theme color of
the app](https://github.com/w3c/manifest/issues/975) between light and dark
mode. I noticed on my Pixel that going back from the root page briefly shows
a blank Chrome tab while closing the app. On MacOS, closing the underlying
browser closes instances of installed web apps that use that browser under the
hood.

All of these things remind users that installable web apps aren't really native
apps, and reflect poorly on the overall experience.

## Conclusion

Even so, I still think the development advantages of installable web apps are
worth tolerating these issues in a lot of cases. For apps that don't need core
native functionality, they are a refreshing alternative with many concrete
advantages. The majority of APIs work well across browsers, even Safari on iOS.

If you're considering building a new application that doesn't need the the app
stores and you can tolerate some of the limitations above, I would give
installable web apps a shot. You might be surprised just how far they can go.

[^react-native-css]:
	https://reactnative.dev/docs/style#known-issues. When I last used React
	Native a few years back, I often found myself running into minor
	differences in how React Native rendered CSS across iOS and Android.
	It was nothing that couldn't be worked around, but nevertheless I find that
	web browsers render more consistently across platforms than React Native.
[^lie-fi]:
	[As coined by Jake
	Archibald](https://youtu.be/cmGr0RszHc8?si=XDSVFHknR8hWy_K3&t=1474).
	I created a custom network profile in Chrome with massive latency and found
	it useful for ensuring the app handled navigations and caching correctly
	without blocking on network requests.
[^trying-it]:
	I will say that it is a lot easier to get someone to try your application
	by just visiting the URL in their browser on their phone. Installing to
	home screen is where you lose most people, but a URL to the live app is
	more accessible than anything you have to manually download.
[^headers]:
	In particular, you have to set some [obscure
	headers](https://github.com/sqlite/sqlite-wasm?tab=readme-ov-file#in-a-wrapped-worker-with-opfs-if-available)
	in order to get it to run at all. I also found that the TypeScript typings
	were missing entirely for a module I wanted to use, though marking
	everything as `any` and following the docs did work.

	Another issue with WebAssembly SQLite is that it adds a 400k binary to your
	site. For heavier apps, this probably isn't much of a concern at all, but
	it can be a pretty big addition to the bundle for more lightweight sites.
